Re-chartering the Fellowship-WG (#15)
django/dsf-working-groups: active/fellowship.md

- Designating one member of the committee to act as the line manager for active fellows.
  - The Board must approve this designation.
  - Defining what it means to be a manager is out of scope for this document, but it's all the typical stuff: one-on-ones, feedback, coaching, and performance management, if necessary.
  - It's expected that this person will have previous engineering management experience.
  - This person also approves expenses for Fellows, subject to the [budget](#budget), see below.
  - Perform bi-annual performance reviews for the fellows, and reports to the board.
    - This can be super informal, short and sweet is fine. This is intended to be a backstop against the unlikely event of performance issues with a fellow, not any sort of stack ranking etc.
- Acting as an escalation point if a Fellow has a disagreement with their designated manager. That is, the escalation path for Fellows is: designated manager -> full Fellowship WG -> Board.

> - Maintaining the formal job description and outline of duties for Fellows. Those changes must be reported to the Board who may veto them by board vote.

Reviewer: Could we look at this information as part of reviewing this WG charter? I’m not sure where those are defined currently.

Author: They're not - my intent was to clarify that the WG needs to have them. I'll clarify that we expect the first group under this new charter to create the first versions of these!

- Gathering and maintaining statistics on the impact and efficacy of the Fellow program (for use in fundraising, reports to sponsors, etc). See [reporting](#reporting) for a short discussion of this report.
- TKTK am I missing anything?

## Initial membership

Upon adoption of this new charter, the Board will issue an open call for members, recruit, and select membership. We'll follow the guidelines outlined below under [future membership](#future-membership) in selecting this initial group./

- Chair: TBD
- Board liaison: TBD
- Designated manager: TBD
- Other members:
  - TBD

## Future membership

Board-managed: the DSF Board appoints members of this WG, including specific roles (chair, Fellow manager).

The Board will select membership with some high-level goals in mind:

- **Diversity**: the WG membership should be diverse, as representative of the global Django community as possible within the confines of a small team.

> - **Management experience**: WG members, _particularly_ the designated manager, should have some engineering management experience, or other relevant experience (i.e. experience with fellowship programs at other NPOs, etc). This isn't a hard

Reviewer 2: Note: This line just... ends. I suspect it wants to at least have ` requirement`.

> Membership is open to volunteers, subject to board approval. [Contact the board](https://www.djangoproject.com/contact/foundation/) to express interest. Please include a brief explanation of how your background aligns with the goals above.

Reviewer: I’m skeptical this is the kind of group that would attract suitable volunteers 🤔

Author: Yeah we'll almost certainly need to recruit

> Members serve a 1-year term, April 1st to February 28/29th, in alignment with the Fellow contracts. At the end of this term, they need to opt into staying involved to keep being

Reviewer: I don’t understand why the term has to align with fellow contracts.

Author: It doesn't really, but it's intended to be nice for Fellows - provide a bit of continuity. I don't feel strgonly about this point -- I only like the pattern of "Every X months you need to renew your interest" because it provides a nice and graecful point for folks to bow out

> Members serve a 1-year term, April 1st to February 28/29th, in alignment with the Fellow contracts. At the end of this term, they need to opt into staying involved to keep being

Author: We don't talk about March

> Members serve a 1-year term, April 1st to February 28/29th, in alignment with the Fellow contracts. At the end of this term, they need to opt into staying involved to keep being

Author: (It was a typo, lol, thanks)

a member of the group. If any member wishes to leave the group before the end of their term, they can do so without a vote.

## Budget

- The Board sets the Fellowship compensation (which is adjusted yearly, automatically, to match CPI inflation).
- The Board establishes a yearly Travel & Expenses budget, which Fellows may spend against (with management approval). This is set to a level to allow Fellows to attend at least one DjangoCon.

>   - Expenses beyond this yearly budget may (probably will!) be approved, but would require approval by the board to increase the budget.

Reviewer: Great!

## Comms

> The Fellowship-WG has a private mailing list, and uses the DSF Slack.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps clarify that there is also a publicly available mailing list that anyone can write to if they have something to say/report/express?

Reviewer 4: What is the public one? I don't think it's even on the website.

Reviewer 3: The email address is: fellowship-committee@djangoproject.com

Reviewer 5: @nessita that is the private mailing list.  There isn't a public one to my knowledge. 

There is a DSF Slack? That's news to me and I'm on the committee! :)

Author: I also added the forum, since i think a lot of Fellow activity happens on the forum

## Reporting

The Fellowship WG is required to submit two kinds of reports:

> - A report on the impact and efficacy of the Fellow program.

Reviewer: Reflecting on the current Fellow reports, I find them useful but as-is wouldn’t know how to judge the efficacy of the program from them. I’m not sure what kind of information would be needed here, tough one.

>   - The specifics of what needs to be in here is up to the Fellowship WG, but probably should include things like count of tickets triaged and PRs reviewed, along with more qualitivave info like highlights of major features reviewed/shepherded, mentorship of new/existing contributors, talks at conferences, etc.

Reviewer 3: PR merges and releases constitute the most significant and impactful aspects of a Fellow's responsibilities, uniquely performed by Fellows, distinguishing them from tasks like ticket triaging, PR reviews, and mentorship, which can be undertaken by anyone in the community. I recommend emphasizing these aspects in reports, particularly noting that Security and Feature releases demand a substantial investment of time and energy.

Author: I think this is broadly up to the individuals involved (Fellows, WG, Board), and doesn't need to be defined explicitly by the charter. It can be something we iterate on and change over time. I'll make that more clear.

## Scope of responsibilities

The Fellowship Working Group manages the [Django Fellowship Program](https://www.djangoproject.com/fundraising/#fellowship-program). This includes:

> - Interviewing candidates for open Fellowship slots and making hiring recommendations to the Board. This includes developing and maintaining interview and selection scripts, exercises, and rubrics.

Reviewer 6: > This includes developing and maintaining interview and selection scripts, exercises, and rubrics.

We didn't interview previously, want to highlight this before we document that interviews are required.

Reviewer 2: Agreed, we have done this purely on written applications and recommendations before, and even that takes a decent chunk of time; adding interviews would make it be a huge cost for the WG. It would be nice to leave the _option_, but let's not phrase it like it's expected?

> - Along with the Fellows themselves, maintaining the job description, outline of duties, and any other similar process documentation for the Fellow role (a "job manual", if you will). By and large these don't currently (as of Spring 2024), so the first group operating under this new charter will be responsible for starting to create this documentation. The Fellows and WG can maintain and update these without explicit Board approval, but should report major changes to the Board for review.

Reviewer 3: Could we use a date reference that is not dependent of a given hemisphere? What about:

`(as of March/April 2024)`

> - Designating one member of the committee to act as the line manager for active fellows. See [Fellow Management](#fellow-management), below, for details of this role.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- A designated member of the committee acts as the line manager for active fellows. See [Fellow Management](#fellow-management), below, for details of this role.
```
I feel like below it says the Board designates who this is while here to me it reads that the group decides this amongst themselves.

> - Acting as an HR committee for Fellows. In the event of a complaint about a Fellow, or if there are performance issues, the Fellowship-WG will investigate, in concert with the [Code of Conduct WG](code-of-conduct.md) if necessary, and present findings and a recommendation to the board for action.

Reviewer 6: Do we want the Fellowship WG to have any mediation responsibilities in case a Fellow wants to report an issue with an individual in a position of responsibility (board/steering/R+T/accessibility/the other Fellow) or do we expect all of this to go directly to the CoC WG to handle? (cc @jefftriplett)

I think it might be nice to explicitly have that the Fellowship WG as a HR committee would also function to support the Fellows rather than only for complaints and performance issues.

Note: I'm hoping none of this will be needed but think it's valuable to define 🙂

Reviewer 7: > Do we want the Fellowship WG to have any mediation responsibilities in case a Fellow wants to report an issue with an individual in a position of responsibility (board/steering/R+T/accessibility/the other Fellow) or do we expect all of this to go directly to the CoC WG to handle? (cc @jefftriplett)

Yes, the Code of Conduct WG exists to help with these types of issues. I think it's important for us to note individual members more publicly in case someone in the WG (or board liaison) has a conflict and a reporter doesn't accident issue a complaint against someone who might also receive it. (this is more of a side note/tangent but worth noting because we have a lot of potential overlap here) 

> I think it might be nice to explicitly have that the Fellowship WG as a HR committee would also function to support the Fellows rather than only for complaints and performance issues.

> - Acting as an HR committee for Fellows. In the event of a complaint about a Fellow, or if there are performance issues, the Fellowship-WG will investigate, in concert with the [Code of Conduct WG](code-of-conduct.md) if necessary, and present findings and a recommendation to the board for action.

I think it's **very** important to point out that the CoC WG does not function in any HR role or capacity. With that in mind, I would consider splitting this bullet point so that it is abundantly clear. 

> - Acting as an HR committee for Fellows. 

> - In the event of a complaint about a Fellow, or if there are performance issues, the Fellowship-WG will investigate, in concert with the [Code of Conduct WG](code-of-conduct.md) if necessary, and present findings and a recommendation to the board for action.

Author: I had _intended_ the second sentence there ("In the event …") be a definition of what "acting as HR" means in this context, so splitting them into multiple points there leaves the definition of what "acting as HR" would mean. But now that I'm looking at this, I think it means we can just drop the "acting as HR" point entirely, just leaving "in the event of a complaint..." point.

@sarahboyce to your point, as I see it if a Fellow wants to make a report against someone in a position of responsibility, the process there is no different than for any other community member: they can go to the CoC committee. I suppose they can _also_ talk to the manager or WG or the Board, but at the moment there's any sort of conduct process to be instigated, I think it's vital to the community that it be handled by the CoC committee, as any other complaint might be. I _absolutely_ don't want to set up a situation where Fellows have additional steps before they can report something to the CoC WG. We could spell this out here if you think we should?

Reviewer 6: Thank you both, I think this is much clearer in my head now. I will reiterate my understanding 👍 

If someone believes a community member (including Fellows) has breached the CoC, this should be reported to the CoC WG.
A line manager would normally want to be informed of these things and so the CoC WG might inform the line manager. But the reporting mechanism is still to the same as any other community member and the Fellows use this like anybody else.

If the concern is not around CoC but around performance[1], for the Fellows this should be reported to the line manager (or Fellow WG). As the Fellows are in paid positions, their performance has an added layer of accountability (including public reports and ways to handle complaints) as funds are finite and saying yes to one thing is saying no to something else.

If there are concerns around the performance of community members in voluntary unpaid positions, the situation is different and more nuanced. If someone wants to report, they should probably inform the board or a board member.

In some ways this is a little related to Jacob's comment
> Eventually, this probably should be a paid ED, if/when we get there 😄

If that sounds right then something like:
> In the event of a complaint about a Fellow, if this is a failure to fulfil the responsibilities of the position or around performance, this should be reported to the Fellowship-WG to investigate. The Fellowship-WG will present findings and a recommendation to the board for action. If this is a Code of Conduct issue, this should be reported to the [Code of Conduct WG](code-of-conduct.md) who will involve the Fellow WG if appropriate.

But probably worded better 🤔 
----

[1] I am defining performance to mean "fulfilment of the assigned responsibilities of the role"

Reviewer 3: I share some of the concerns laid out here, to me this bullet point could lead to some confusion in terms of what an HR committee is and the scope of its function.

I think Sarah's proposal makes it clearer, assuming that is what you meant @jacobian ?

  - As with the CoC-WG, the Fellowing-WG has the power to unilaterally suspend Fellows, with pay, pending an investigation. This power should only be used in egregious circumstances, where waiting on investigation and/or board action might plausibly be harmful.

> - Acting as an escalation point if a Fellow has a disagreement with their designated manager (or that person isn't available, etc). The escalation path for Fellows is: designated manager -> full Fellowship WG -> Board.

Reviewer 3: Given the above, I would suggest:
```suggestion
- Acting as an escalation point if a Fellow has a disagreement with their designated manager (or if that person isn't available, etc). The escalation path for Fellows is: designated manager -> any other member of the Fellowship-WG, and additionally, they may escalate to a Board member if the former options are not available.
```

> - Acting as an escalation point if a Fellow has a disagreement with their designated manager (or that person isn't available, etc). The escalation path for Fellows is: designated manager -> full Fellowship WG -> Board.

Reviewer 6: Escalating from designated manager to full Fellowship WG is a bit odd as the manager is included in the Fellowship WG
This would work is the designated manager is not available but if there is an issue with them, is an awkward escalation approach

Author: What would you suggest -- going straight to the Board, perhaps? Or clarify that they _can_ escalate to the WG, but can also choose to skip them and go right to the Board?

My intent here is to make sure that Fellows don't get "stuck" with a manager relationship that's not working for them, and that they have ways to get help if something goes wrong.

Reviewer 2: I would suggest that it's just to one of the other WG members (since we'll always have at least two) rather than the full set.

Reviewer 6: > My intent here is to make sure that Fellows don't get "stuck" with a manager relationship that's not working for them, and that they have ways to get help if something goes wrong.

I really appreciate having this, thank you

> I would suggest that it's just to one of the other WG members (since we'll always have at least two) rather than the full set.

This makes sense to me 👍

Author: WFM. I also re-worded this to say that Fellows _can_ escalate to (various options), so as not to imply they must follow a particular chain. Options, not requirements.

### Fellow Management

One member of the committee is designated as the manager for the Fellows. It's expected that this person will have previous engineering management experience, and the Board must approve this designation.

Defining the specifics of this role is out of scope for this document -- it should be developed and maintained by consensus of the Fellows and the WG members and laid out in the documentation mentioned above.

Broadly speaking, this should be thought of as a "supportive" management role, rather than a "directive" one. The DSF intends to grant a very high degree of autonomy to Fellows. The DSF trusts their judgement on what's right to work on. So the person designated as the Fellows manager is there to provide the Fellows whatever support they need to be happy and productive. This may include help with setting priorities, coaching, and so forth -- subject to what each Fellow needs. It's suggested that the Fellows hold one-on-ones with their manager at least monthly.

The designated manager is also the official approver for expenses for Fellows, subject to the [budget](#budget), see below.

## Initial membership

> Upon adoption of this new charter, the Board will issue an open call for members, recruit, and select membership. We'll follow the guidelines outlined below under [future membership](#future-membership) in selecting this initial group./

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Upon adoption of this new charter, the Board will issue an open call for members, recruit, and select membership. We'll follow the guidelines outlined below under [future membership](#future-membership) in selecting this initial group.
```

- Chair: TBD
- Board liaison: TBD
- Designated manager: TBD
- Other members:
  - TBD

> ## Future membership

Reviewer 6: Do we want the Fellows to have a say in the selection processes?

Author: I super hope you will :)

Author: Added a line to this effect to the charter to make it explicit because explicit is yada yada

Membership is open to volunteers, subject to board approval. [Contact the board](https://www.djangoproject.com/contact/foundation/) to express interest. Please include a brief explanation of how your background aligns with the goals above.

Members serve a 1-year term, April 1st to March 31st, in alignment with the Fellow contracts. At the end of this term, they need to opt into staying involved to keep being
a member of the group. If any member wishes to leave the group before the end of their term, they can do so without a vote.

## Budget

- The Board sets the Fellowship compensation (which is adjusted yearly, automatically, to match CPI inflation).
- The Board establishes a yearly Travel & Expenses budget, which Fellows may spend against (with management approval). This is set to a level to allow Fellows to attend at least one DjangoCon.
  - Expenses beyond this yearly budget may (probably will!) be approved, but would require approval by the board to increase the budget.

## Comms

The Fellowship-WG has a private mailing list, and uses the DSF Slack. Fellows themselves generally work in the open, on the Django Forum and other public spaces.

## Reporting

> The Fellowship WG is required to submit regular reports on the impact and efficacy of the Fellow program.

Reviewer 3: Across the document there are usages of "Fellowship WG" and "Fellowship-WG", is there a preferred spelling and should we stick to that one?

Frequency: at least quarterly, with a strong preference for some sort of live "dashboard" (read: Google Sheet) that's updated more regularly for the Board to check any time.

> The specifics of what needs to be in here will change over time, and should be an ongoing conversation between Fellows, the Fellowship-WG, and the Board. It can and should change and evolve over time. It should probably should include things like count of tickets triaged and PRs reviewed, along with more qualitivave info like highlights of major features reviewed/shepherded, mentorship of new/existing contributors, talks at conferences, etc. Fellows already record much of this in their weekly reports to the community, so the WG's responsibility is to roll this up into longer-term metrics, highlight themes, and help make sure the information in these reports is useful to the Board and other consumers (sponsors, community members, etc).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The specifics of what needs to be in here will change over time, and should be an ongoing conversation between Fellows, the Fellowship-WG, and the Board. It can and should change and evolve over time. It should probably include things like count of tickets triaged and PRs reviewed, along with more qualitative info like highlights of major features reviewed/shepherded, mentorship of new/existing contributors, talks at conferences, etc. Fellows already record much of this in their weekly reports to the community, so the WG's responsibility is to roll this up into longer-term metrics, highlight themes, and help make sure the information in these reports is useful to the Board and other consumers (sponsors, community members, etc).
```

> The Fellowship-WG is also expected to report any meta-issues or problems to the board. E.g. things like themes in the kind of problems Fellows are running into, ongoing strategic questions without answers, problems with DSF infrastructure, emerging performance issues, and so forth.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Fellowship-WG is also expected to report any meta-issues or problems to the Board. E.g. things like themes in the kind of problems Fellows are running into, ongoing strategic questions without answers, problems with DSF infrastructure, emerging performance issues, and so forth.
```

The Fellowship Working Group manages the [Django Fellowship Program](https://www.djangoproject.com/fundraising/#fellowship-program). This includes:

- Interviewing candidates for open Fellowship slots and making hiring recommendations to the Board. This includes developing and maintaining interview and selection scripts, exercises, and rubrics.

> - Along with the Fellows themselves, maintaining the job description, outline of duties, and any other similar process documentation for the Fellow role (a "job manual", if you will). By and large these don't currently (as of Spring 2024), so the first group operating under this new charter will be responsible for starting to create this documentation. The Fellows and WG can maintain and update these without explicit Board approval, but should report major changes to the Board for review.

Reviewer 8: Missing an "exist". 

> By and large these don't **exist** currently
